this talk is really it's a bit about
responsibility and democratization but
probably not in the way that you might
be expecting um so to get things started
my name is John oh my online handle is
John Obi r 1 i'm an artist that makes
work with i use graphic design and
computer programming to kind of create a
lot of the projects that i make pieces
that I make expression and stuff i'm
also a designer and developer during the
day I've worked at companies and small
studios and stuff and I grew up here I
grew up in berkeley 16 miles away and
this is a lot of the reason why i think
a festival like this is super important
I've always been interested in art and a
lot of that has been because of San
Francisco this is this is one of the
fine museum and art institutions in this
area there they're currently on the go
right now so they have exhibitions kind
of all over the the bay area and and San
Francisco um and growing up I saw
amazing retrospectives and and pieces
art art installations like or sorry
photo photo installations and exhibits
like this one bite Diane Arbus abstract
paintings like the Ellsworth Kelly
that's is the second one on the left
local artists from the Bay Area like
Wayne tebow big retrospectives like this
Philip Guston piece this was part of a
retrospective in 2002 I think and and
the famous pieces by paul klee all of
these and many more kind of got me
really interested in art um and kind of
along that I was also very much a
digital native my parents who are in the
audience today um gave me a gateway
computer uh in middle school and I would
use that to go on IRC I don't know if
you guys know what that is good old now
uh I would I would talk and talk about
anime and trade pictures and
videos and yeah we can talk about that
later if you're um so kind of with with
that background of really being
interested in art and also spending a
lot of time on the computer I moved to
Los Angeles to study design media arts
at UCLA and the reason that I decided to
go to that program was because at the
time it seemed like it blended a lot of
art practices and studio work with
emerging technologies and just you know
generally using a computer um and one of
the things that I was really drawn to
was this class called interactivity
where I was introduced to this
environment called processing um it's uh
well this is what it looks like if
you're not familiar with it it's a text
editor that's an application that you
can use you can write rules and scripts
to create animations and interactions
and you can use it with the computer
itself where you can attach it to other
things and I took as many classes as I
could while I was there and studied
under Casey reese who is the co-founder
of this project processing who also I
don't know if he's here yet but he's
speaking tomorrow um yeah so I I got
really I wasn't really a programmer kind
of before taking these classes but I got
I got really sucked in to this idea of
like wow i can write rules and systems
and create animations and you know in
some ways life so i want to show you a
series of real-time processing
applications that i've made over the
course of 2008 to 2010 and these were
little sketches that i would write to
kind of try a different technique and
kind of bind them to music and try to
find you know what aesthetically or
technically was the right application
for this song so we'll go through like a
few pieces and hopefully it will load
I
Oh
I eat see that there were different
techniques so I sometimes I try to use
the computer I the camera and get a feed
but I was also playing with composition
and colors to try to match different
songs and I I definitely realized
throughout this process that there's a
lot of possibilities but also that I
wasn't the only person trying to do this
stuff I learned about a lot of artists
during this time that we're doing they
were trying to visualize music in in
ways as well this is a piece by Pia
mondrian in 1914 called composition 5
and a lot of his work kind of deals with
the rhythm and flow of of how songs are
arranged I actually really like this
piece more than his more famous pieces
because it has a little bit of more of a
human quality it's like there's like
emergent kind of layers and stuff
whistling Kandinsky is it is another
awesome artist that that I kind of Drew
a lot of inspiration from during this
time this is a piece called on white too
and it's from 1923 you can kind of see
there's a lot of different like motifs
and themes that are similar to like a
chorus verse kind of structure uh and
also like the kind of dynamic qualities
of this imagery really awesome um and
then this this is a really bad screen
grab of it so I'm sorry I'm not doing it
justice but of this movie this is one of
the first moving images ever called CM
Symphony diagon alley by viking eggling
in 1924 and it's incredible to see how
there was no sound kind of made to this
piece um but the the kind of like
delicacy that he took in a brand new
medium was like really awesome i highly
recommend checking it out um so based
off of seeing you know a few this
was a few of the artists but I learned a
lot a lot more and kind of making my own
experience experiments I realized that
audio and video they seemed really kind
of on separate ends of a spectrum of
expression but they're actually there's
quite a lot of overlap and so for my
next project what I tried to focus on
was uh what are that what are the
commonalities between them and I zeroed
in on this idea of thee I don't know if
you guys are familiar with an
oscilloscope but what it does is it kind
of draws the waves of sound um and
mathematically you know these sound
waves r sine and cosine these very
simple mathematical functions um so kind
of taking those ideas i started making
animations which i then kind of pitched
to this band el'atone who's amazing duo
from japan this is shawn and yoshi me
they make up the band if they wanted to
make sounds for each of these animations
and through kind of the opportunity at
grey area we were able to explore and
experiment and iterate to create this
project called pata tap I don't know if
you've heard of it but this is a screen
capture of it so I'm going to demo it
really quickly um it's a musical
instrument this is the website it's just
that uh pata tap calm and basically your
keyboard or any way you touch on your
phone if you download the app represents
a sound and in animation so this is what
Q sounds like or looks like this is what
W sounds and looks like this is what you
are and you can play them you know like
you would any kind of like drum set or
or piano
but you can also play them together as
cords and you can also change the color
palates uh alternatively it also changes
the sound palettes and you can be really
aggressive with it if you want um I like
this last one this is actually all
yoshimi voices um so yeah that's that's
Pat atta and we we were lost we launched
this project uh about a year ago in
March 2014 the response for this was
insane like there are thousands of
videos on YouTube and Instagram and
sound like songs made on soundcloud that
people using this and integrating it
with their own music which is super
amazing to see um but we also got a lot
of press this is one of them it's called
it's by refinery29 and it's well you can
read it prepare to spend way too much
time with pata tab and it goes on to say
pata tap takes a familiar conundrum
being supremely bored in front of your
computer and saves you from backsliding
into the rabbit hole of wonky cat gifts
and which lindsay lohan are you quizzes
and this is a this is a big moment for
us because well you know we had kind of
made this in a very small private
setting that we we didn't really think
about how the public would em embrace it
and we kind of started to realize you
notes that this is a very positive
review but in a kind of weird negative
way about boredom and wasting time and
stuff like that um and similar to uh you
know these other artists that I showed
wassily kandinsky and pa Mondrian and
Viking eggling there are articles that
exists the this one is from 100 years
ago about a project at this this guy
alex rose made and the headline here is
is the piano dead and the this author
Maxwell Hamilton
chronicles this this stenographer alex
rose stenography it is he's like the
typewriter he transcribes what people
are saying in the courtroom and he took
this idea of the typewriter which he
spent so much time was time with and
tried to kind of subvert that so he made
this thing called a type of tune in 1939
and what it is is the typewriter that
you can play and it actually produces
sound instead of producing written
messages and for for me and Lola tone in
our collaboration on pata tap and then
also working in the future this was a
this was like a big holy crap coincident
because we actually for the last year
have been making a a similar thing it's
called type a tone um and I've never
shown this to anybody yet but I'm gonna
live demo this new project right now um
so yeah it's a it's a text editor not
quite a typewriter but when you type
sounds are made uh and when you wait a
second it plays them back for you you
obviously can turn off the sound of you
want want to hear it um but you can also
change the filter on them and it changes
kind of the intonation of tampering set
leave a more dreamy message message
what are you going to write um again you
can download your message is a WAV file
one thing that we found with pata
tapping the feedback is that a lot of
people love writing their names you know
so you can just this is what my name
sounds like and I could have that as a
ringtone I thought them and then
obviously you can oh I need to write
something right you can also share your
message and you get it you get a
permalink and I or or embed code so go
to this URL now you can share that and
it plays back what you wrote Thanks and
this is this is what the embeds look
like you can embed the entire editor or
you can embed specific messages so you
know on your tumblr or whatever web
platform you use for your website or
portfolio you know you can embed you can
embed your messages or allow people so
that's type of tone it's um it's not out
yet uh and we have a Facebook page if
you search type of tone you'll find it
and we'll we'll let you know through
that Avenue when when it is launched but
kind of going back in contextualizing
this project with you know type of tune
and these other amazing works of kind of
audio-visual stuff I came across this
this model if we look at the artists
that I presented earlier today as well
as alex rose they all that work falls in
like a 10 or 15 year period in the 20s
and 30s and this is an economic graph
called a Clark sector model and it
basically describes as a technology kind
of matures
you you get a wider audience kind of
using those resources so technology here
is in a very broad sense the blue line
is the economy the US economy built a
based off of creating employment and
money versus or sorry creating money
generating money through resources so
you know like coal or silver rice the
orange line is industries that use those
resources to create products and the
Green Line is the service industry so
it's these kind of like derivatives of
each other of how commerce is is made
and I'm not an economist but it's it's
fascinating that at this market in
deindustrialization all of not just
these inventions like the type of tune
which doesn't really exist today but is
a really interesting relic of that
period but also these amazing ideas from
artists like p.m. and Rihanna wassily
kandinsky which are in all the greatest
museums um all happen at the at this
kind of like critical point so I'm not
an economist but my takeaway is that
this maturity in in technology I eats
it's a trend but it also comes out of
actual individuals output the this graph
wouldn't exist if all of these people
other inventors and stuff didn't make
things that people actually bought or
used in society and I think if we look
almost 100 years about a hundred years
later today I think we're in a very
similar space you know it's I don't know
where on the curve we are but there is
this Drive in me that I think is
important to to explore and experiment
with these ideas and I look forward to
seeing what all of you guys do as well
because as technology gets more and more
democratized it's our responsibility to
make things um and with that I wanna say
thanks
can
you